Yeah, I look at
Yeah, in addition, I was thinking even like transitioning from like a outdoor field experience to like even a lab bench experience, like maybe testing the mold in the school or something, you know?
Grow some mold on plates.
There comes the question, what does
related to students.
Then what does a place-based science lesson can be?
What can you integrate there?
How do you use the place in your science class?
Or your places?
In terms of data,
First-hand data, second-hand data.
How would you use those?
How do you think about those?
Well, like we said, the place is where you are, right?
So place-based data or place-based lessons, being curious about where you are.
Students are asking questions about their school yard, their community, the river flow next by.
for it and where you can find the place for you.
Next, I'm going to hand pass time to pass the stage to our teachers.
Is Josh, are you talking for a second?
Oh, no.
Good morning, everybody.
Sorry to run around with all the cameras.
This is for our motion picture movie coming out soon.
Incredible Hulk.
The Incredible Hulk.
Ooh.
term on its own, but it's less intimidating than the term
what we knew about and what we know about pandemics.
I'm not sure.
I don't really know.
These are all probabilistic terms that we can use.
And maybe part of what you could do is find language that works for your students.
Probably 96% confident.
That's kind of not accessible.
But maybe I'm not sure.
I'm a little sure.
the needle.
So, um, okay.
So thanks, David.
Um, so, so this was just a like, basically a worksheet.
We're not in kind of like everything in this project.
This is sort of an initial design effort from Amanda, actually, she taught with this with her students last year in block County, I forget Amanda's Eagleton.
But part of what we're hoping is in
So for now, we just want to share this with you.
In a subsequent one of those days we asked you about
Last thing I swear is we don't want this to be intimidating.
We want part of our job is to try to figure out
I would also prefer if you don't look through it.
Yeah, don't look through it.
Make sure you have a writing utensil and then we're gonna be
Anybody need a clipboard or a notebook or a pencil before we get started?
Show me thumbs up.
I've got my utensils.
Thumbs down.
I need someone to come help me get my utensils.
All right, cool.
So before we start doing science, I want us to revisit our norms, because it's first thing in the morning.
So if you could all turn to your left, to my right, over towards where Catherine is.
And can I get someone to read the first norm for us?
Be open to something new.
Thanks.
Can someone read me the second one?
Choice.
Making a space to encourage being brave.
All included in her communication.
Growth.
Valuing input.
Thank you.
So I would love for y'all to take one minute.
I'll set a timer.
I want you to take a second and reflect either in your head or on your paper how yesterday you followed one of these norms and then how today you could incorporate one of these norms, maybe step outside the comfort zone a little bit.
Can y'all still see to write if the lights are like this?
I'd love to hear from two people if anyone is interested in sharing.
How are you looking forward to practicing any of these?
How did you practice it yesterday or how are you looking
I really enjoyed helping Jen be brave enough to catch herself.
So I really love this activity I always like as I've mentioned I do something really similar with sixth graders every year and I have them come up with their own norms for themselves but also for me and we hang them on the board and we revisit them regularly and it's a lot easier for me to say like you said this is how you wanted to be treated
We're going to get started.
We have new standards.
to one of the disciplinary core ideas in science and the science and engineering practices of like unity and diversity among living things.
So even if you don't have a standard that says the word biodiversity in it, which is what we're gonna be talking about today, I encourage you to like really dig deep and think about how you could incorporate some of these ideas and specifically discussions around the experiment and around experimentation with your students.
you're still talking about the interconnectedness between.
OK, so this is just a turn and talk real quick.
We'll do another just one minute.
How do you use data in your life outside of school?
So we're not talking school at this point.
And then what kind of data would a scientist need to collect in order to know how healthy an ecosystem is?
So spend like 15 seconds on this one, like how do you use data outside of school, and then like 45 seconds on that one.
All right, so turn and talk.
I always use
Yeah.
What kind of data would a scientist need to collect in order to know?
Bioindicators, yeah.
So counting water systems and everything that's in the water.
Yeah, yeah.
Totally.
And then we'll talk about some of that, too.
Soil data, yeah.
Water quality.
But how?
Presence of water.
How do you know?
And then you could, like, water quality and stuff like that, too.
So we've talked about data a little bit, so let's just start going into this idea of how do we know, so for the next few hours, how do we know how healthy an ecosystem is?
And I know that once again, your teachers and some of us have taught all of these things, but that's where we're going.
So if you don't know richness versus heaveness, this is a very common picture that I've used
So richness and evenness.
So just think to yourself about what the root of those words mean before you even think about it with the word species, right?
So evenness is how things are, how would you say evenness?
Okay, yeah.
So richness is number of species.
So evenness is the distribution, okay?
So when we're thinking about biodiversity, we can think about species even
the biodiversity in the area based on the niches and niches available I don't know how you say it in Michigan I said niche and now I say niche so whatever whatever it is so yeah absolutely so I want you to just think for a second is biodiversity and you can write it if you want or just think is biodiversity necessary to have a healthy ecosystem so just think for a second
Alright.
Does anyone want to say what they think?
Okay, beautiful.
So that's, we've got that mindset.
Here we go.
So we were thinking with that species evenness and richness components, how healthy is our local ecosystem?
So think back to Knoxville and they are, there's lots of places where we have people go out and we're paying to remove honeysuckle or we are going out volunteering to remove honeysuckle, right?
With our
IB science juniors, we are working together with IAMS.
And IAMS is focusing on bird scat.
Is it really worth the time to remove all these invasives?
Is it helping the birds?
Is it hurting the birds?
What kind of biodiversity, like is the biodiversity changing on its own and should we interfere with that, right?
And then also kind of like this bamboo interdependence.
dies, they all die.
So then what happens for that ecosystem?
Any thoughts on these things?
How can we get the monsters?
Well, we have bamboo, too, so we can't forget about those ones.
But invasive bamboo.
But yeah, so just be thinking about what really makes biodiversity, what really makes a healthy ecosystem.
All right, so once again, I showed you guys this yesterday.
I have the luxury of having these two particular standard
So this is my kiddos out in the native plant garden.
You can see it's not growing very much at this point, but we could still go out and we could look at the remnants from last year, or we could look at what is starting to sprout this year and have these little quadrats and figure out the population abundance using different sampling strategies.
Can you say what a quadrat is?
Yeah.
So I think it's just IB that says
quadra as well okay I couldn't I didn't know so quadra is like a quadrant of land could be a circle square yeah we use circles just could be this coral reef hula hoops are easy so yeah okay
All right, thank you.
So this is what Josh was talking about a little bit.
So just a moment ago, I said, think about like back in Knoxville, right?
And think about items and think about like how we work to try and make that ecosystem more healthy in our minds, right?
But now I want you to think about just outside here.
Okay, so we've been walking around for a day.
So how healthy is this ecosystem?
So just think to yourself, account for what you already know,
We can do a feeling of place.
When we do all those things, we can account for what we know.
So think about how healthy is the ecosystem outside based on what you know.
So we're going to ask you guys, based on what you know, be open to new evidence as we go out.
So what do you know at this point?
What do you see when we get out there and assess the biodiversity in our hula hoops?
And then consider your confidence.
What is your level of confidence?
we could come back in and start this again, right?
And account for what we know.
Be open to new evidence.
Consider your evidence.
And that's what we're going to do with Jen's lesson here in just a little bit, OK?
So we're doing more terrestrial, and then they're doing more aquatic.
So just think about that as we go through those lessons today.
All right, to your paper.
I would prefer if you don't flip around at the moment, because there's some hints ahead.
I just printed it all.
Normally, I have this on Canvas, and it's like, click there.
So the two standards are at the top, and that's just for me.
You can change those to whatever standards you'd like if you want to use this exact same activity.
And I used to start off, the only reason I did species richness and evenness for you guys is because I would have already done that for the students so that they have that background knowledge.
But otherwise, I used to tell them this objective.
By the end of the day, you should be able to evaluate population abundance of a non-modal species, which can be estimated using random sampling, systematic sampling, or transect sampling.
rattle that off.
And then it'd be like, all right, who knows what this word means?
Who knows what this word means, right?
Because that's the objective.
So then last year, with the mindset of Project Credible, I started to put a little bit more of this on the students.
So for more of like them dissecting the objective and them modeling what they think this is going to look like before we go outside, rather than me telling them what it's going to look like before we go outside.
So on the front of your paper,
I have first dissect the objective, and this is exactly what I do with my students, so don't be, think I'm talking down to you, okay?
So first, dissect the objective and try to define each of the underlined words using only your brain.
Alright?
So let's take a minute, look at the objective, look at the underlined words, just write down whatever you think they mean.
If you know them, that's cool, if you don't, put, I don't know that word.
You.
All right, just for the sake of time, and so we can get outside here shortly, now go ahead and go to the second part.
Join your shoulder partner or group mates and see if you came up with similar definitions.
So just talk about what you wrote down.
If you knew one that they didn't, then go ahead and talk with them about that.
I'm not moving.
That's easy.
Estimated a guess with mathematical backing.
OK.
That's your prior knowledge or gathered information.
So for the ones that you didn't get to, do you have any guesses for how you would define those words?
Like random for me is something, because random is random.
Right.
How did you put that material?
I didn't do that one, because it was easier to write what a transect was, and I ran out of time.
just be maybe walking around the area counting.
Systematic and transect seems to be similar.
Like transect is a systematic way.
So this is just to have a plan, right?
Yeah, so systematic is like any plan.
And then transect is like over time.
Or like over space.
We use the elephant.
And then we did like in
All right, so now go ahead and flip your paper, but try not to look at the adjoining page.
I know that's silly.
So just try and flip it and look at this one right here, where it says third, fourth, fifth.
Don't look at the adjoining page.
It's just there for the next step.
So now third, fourth, fifth.
And once again, we're doing this with our students, so just kind of think about a methodology for third.
And then fifth, draw a visual of what this might look like when we go outside.
That's a lot to ask for just a couple minutes.
Apparently, I give my students quite some time to work through this.
So why don't you pick one of those three, whichever one you prefer.
So either write out a methodology or what kind of preconceived ideas might you have, or draw out a visual, kind of whatever you're feeling with your brain.
This is non motile, yeah?
But we're doing non-modal.
No snails.
So plants and fungi.
Or are we just doing plants?
All right.
And then go ahead and.
All right, so as we look at this criteria, this is exactly what we do.
So the goal of this is that if someone were to get your data and go back to this exact same coordinate and look at this exact same spot, they could assess the biodiversity year after year and compare that to other places, right?
So you could just name your quadrat anything you want.
You're going to have coordinates.
You're going to have the bearing using a compass.
Any visual references?
see?
Are you this far from this pole?
Are you this far from this tree?
Date, time, and weather conditions.
A sketch of the map of the site.
Pictures of each species.
So if you have a phone, you can take pictures or you can sketch pictures.
We're actually, Krebs is jazzing this up a little bit at the moment, so we're gonna change it up just a little bit when we get outside and we're actually going to
decide what species we see the most of, and then we're going to classify those as A through E. So we all have five species that are common, and then we're going to have other.
So then we could compile our data and say, okay, the biodiversity of this quadrat had this much A, and the biodiversity of this quadrat had this much of this species.
Does that make sense?
He's going to orchestrate that because his brain's going.
And then these are the things that you're going to have to have when you finish your report.
So same for my students.
All right, so let's keep flipping for just a second.
I don't think, yeah, you're good.
You can go to the next one.
All right, so once again, this is just stuff I show my students on Canvas.
So this is from the IB website.
So we took a picture of the whole area.
You can see there's pictures of the typical vegetation.
So just look through these few pages for a moment.
You can see the site two is like in Switzerland.
They've got the coordinates.
They've got the altitude.
They've got pictures of the different species there.
So we're kind of doing something similar to this.
I just put those on there just to kind of give us a visual reference before we go out.
All right, so we are about to go outside.
If you look at your objective again, so we are going to figure out, evaluate population abundance of non-modal species.
What does that mean?
Non-movie.
We are going to estimate.
Is it going to be perfect?
Heck no.
We're going to do random, systematic, or transect.
What do y'all think if we're using hula hoops?
Transect.
Yeah.
So with my kids, when we get to the garden, sometimes they're very careful.
Like, I want all the species in my hula hoop, right?
But then other times, they're like, woo!
And see where it lands.
So when I first started doing this, it was in January.
We were outside, and we were just assessing the biodiversity of what's in the grass, really.
And now we have a native garden, so we can use it a little bit more for that and stuff.
So yeah.
So quadrants are not systematic.
They can be.
But ours are not going to be.
They will not.
OK.
Got it.
I've got the difference.
OK.
So you need your journal.
You need a partner.
Probably a clipboard.
Obviously, your packet, right?
So you can know what criteria is included.
There are also two examples of what my students have done in the past.
There was one from home and then one from school.
I think what we can do now is I left the hula hoops outside.
We're not using quadrants, I think you mentioned that.
Grab a partner, grab a hula hoop, and I'll give you further instructions.
We're going to kind of go where moth and bat less.
And bear poop.
Yeah, close your eyes.
We'll play moth and bat.
I'll play the moth.
Find me.
You got tape and marker.
That's just the IB stuff.
There's all, you know, all international.
That's true.